how does the mind map of evolution helps to better understand the integrity of information of corporate and political systems.

I will shine light on <any butt hurt>.
The first step towards understanding the problem is to ask a question about it. 
This is cool, it will give you a personal house and an ability to catch up with me. (this will be solved with a collage).

Equal rights и equal opportunities / capabilities, forever, no fight.
Many options = a crowd, structuring and choice of one option out of many = a best (sometimes the only) solution.

When I was a CEO, I noticed how big of an issue is absense of "Equal Rights and Opportunities" and "Truth" in the world around me. 
I started digging with the goal to find a way to stop fighting about these things forever.

In the area of self-development it helps to understand into which direction you should study.
Also by layering this knowledge on top of something else you better see where the limits are.

It goes a little bit into a direction of "equal rights" but not so much that a person would cross the line from demanding "equal rights" to demanding "priviliges".
This approach also drasticly improves the speed of studying to be able to keep up with modern pace of development.

This is not meant to be a complete reference of biological species.
The goal here was to see the overall picture.
This is a bi-lingual version (English + Russian + sometimes Latin).

If you know how to store information - you can create or destroy any informational structure (может решено президентским тайтлом).
You don't necesserily need to extract the storage of the information to destroy the system.
It's enough to discredit the channels that it is using, and to discredit the information that lays there.
This helps to understand, which information should be marked as confidential (the information about the parts of the system itself), and which should be marked as secret (information about parts of other essenses).

I was interested to know why the needs, that exist, have formed the way they are today.

I started putting together biological species from Wikipedia and other resources trying to see the full picture.

And I came to the conclusion that the goal of all needs is to store and reorganize information.

But not just any, but the information about which parts of "me" can be used in an automated fashion to turn the world around "me" from chaos to order, and from dead ends to diversity.

And the reason of this is usually a response to events that affect "me", but don't take into consideration all of "my" capabilities and integrity, and thus are harmful to "me" .

Open, you'll see.

> Open <

For convenience, most of the branches are collapsed.

To expand them click on the numbers (or CTRL+9 to open all at once).

I recommend to drag it with a mouse to the top right corner of the document, to see the picture starting from a human.

таргетить это проджект менеджерам? (менеджершам?) менеджершам по управлению персоналом? сказать мол 
A big part of management is about information, deciding which information to make private, which to make public. 
Another big piece of it is an ability to say NO to people you are actually responsible for. 
You have to be able to decide, which of their desires are crucial to satisfy, which ones you can neglect, and satisfying which would even harm the project or system. 
By looking into a mindmap that I made you will understand which information falls into which category and why the mistakes you do at this level can cause the damage.
charisma. seeing and remembering this will make others respect you and your decisions.